docs: add doc to recover from pod from lost node (#7282)
rook/rook: Documentation/ceph-recover-pod-on-LostNode.md

---

> title: ceph-recover-pod-on-LostNode

Reviewer: Instead of creating a new doc, how about if we just add a new section to the CSI troubleshooting guide?

weight: 11125
indent: true
---

> # Node lost and still has the pod in it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Force deleting pods when a Node is lost
```

> ### In this case, you will see one of the pod is **stuck** in the `Terminating` state and another pod in the `ContainerCreating` state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a node is lost, you will see each pod on the node stuck in the `Terminating` state while another pod is rescheduled and is in the `ContainerCreating` state.
```

```console
kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod
```
>```
>csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-8ldf9                  0/1     ContainerCreating   0          24m
>csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-nl6hf                  1/1     Terminating         0          32m
>```

> And, when you describe the pod stuck in `ContainerCreating` you see `Warning` like below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When describing the pod stuck in `ContainerCreating` there is a `Warning` like below with a "multi-attach" error
```

```console
$ kubectl -n rook-ceph describe pod csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-8ldf9

Warning  FailedAttachVolume  17m                  attachdetach-controller                Multi-Attach error for volume "pvc-ccb1108e-4d3d-4478-9c16-56a1e3001a7a" Volume is already used by pod(s) csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-rwdxq
Warning  FailedMount         3m43s (x6 over 15m)  kubelet, ip-10-0-159-129.ec2.internal  Unable to attach or mount volumes: unmounted volumes=[mypvc], unattached volumes=[mypvc default-token-s2fdk]: timed out waiting for the condition
```

**Solution:**

Delete the pod stuck in `Terminating` state forcefully
```console
$ kubectl -n rook-ceph delete pod csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-nl6hf --grace-period 0 --force
```

> **And** then wait for few minutes.

Reviewer: How long did you wait? When this issue hit Seb and I a few days ago, waiting a few minutes did not help to get it started. Perhaps we should combine the next section with this one so it will be clear that additional steps may need to be taken to remove the watcher.

Reviewer 2: we don't need to wait as we have deleted the pod forcefully we just need to ensure the pod is gone from the Node which is lost.

Author: @Madhu-1 IIUC after deleting the pod forcefully still have to wait around 5 to 7 min for container creating to be in running state.

Reviewer 2: that depends on the manual recovery steps we do. but AFAIC this waiting is to make sure the pod gets deleted which is in a terminating state.

Author: Thanks @Madhu-1 for clearing the confusion. I'll remove this `And then wait...`

Reviewer: To be clear, there are two parts to deleting the pod. 
1. Force delete the pod. K8s will remove the pod from the API server after some short timeout. (a minute or two?)
2. If the node is lost (network is not connecting) the pod could actually remain running on that node. The admin must confirm that the node will never come back or else it could cause corruption.

We need to document both of the steps.

To verify

```console
kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod
```
>```
> csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-8ldf9                  1/1     Running       0          39m
>```

> And, when you describe the pod now

Reviewer: No need to show the details when it's running.

Normal   SuccessfulAttachVolume  3m6s               attachdetach-controller                AttachVolume.Attach succeeded for volume "pvc-ccb1108e-4d3d-4478-9c16-56a1e3001a7a"
Warning  FailedMount             94s (x8 over 19m)  kubelet, ip-10-0-159-129.ec2.internal  Unable to attach or mount volumes: unmounted volumes=[mypvc], unattached volumes=[mypvc default-token-s2fdk]: timed out waiting for the condition
Normal   AddedInterface          78s                multus                                 Add eth0 [10.129.2.21/23]
Normal   Pulling                 78s                kubelet, ip-10-0-159-129.ec2.internal  Pulling image "docker.io/library/nginx:latest"
Normal   Pulled                  74s                kubelet, ip-10-0-159-129.ec2.internal  Successfully pulled image "docker.io/library/nginx:latest"
Normal   Created                 74s                kubelet, ip-10-0-159-129.ec2.internal  Created container web-server
Normal   Started                 74s                kubelet, ip-10-0-159-129.ec2.internal  Started container web-server

```

> # Node lost and still has the device in it

Reviewer: How is this case different from the first one? The terminating pod was no longer found?

Reviewer 2: when a node is lost actual sometimes a two-step process is required to recover the application

* Removing the volume attachment
* Removing the watchers on the image

Reviewer: Why wouldn't those steps always be required? It seems like they only wouldn't apply if the node is still online for cleanup, and that wouldn't be a lost node scenario.

### In this case, you will see pod in `ContainerCreating` state

```console
kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod
```
>```
> csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-cqbcd           0/1     ContainerCreating   0          24s
>```

And, when you will describe the pod `Warning` like below

```console
$ kubectl -n rook-ceph describe pod csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-cqbcd

Warning  FailedMount             115s (x3 over 6m28s)  kubelet, ip-10-0-159-129.ec2.internal  Unable to attach or mount volumes: unmounted volumes=[mypvc], unattached volumes=[mypvc default-token-s2fdk]: timed out waiting for the condition
Warning  FailedMount             114s (x7 over 7m25s)  kubelet, ip-10-0-159-129.ec2.internal  MountVolume.MountDevice failed for volume "pvc-ccb1108e-4d3d-4478-9c16-56a1e3001a7a" : rpc error: code = Internal desc = rbd image replicapool/csi-vol-1a1bbb34-7461-11eb-a32b-0a580a81020c is still being used
```

**Solution:**

The solution is to remove the watcher, following the commands below

```console

> $ kubectl -n rook-ceph exec -it rook-ceph-tools-6b4889fdfd-2qrmt -- sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl -n rook-ceph exec deploy/rook-ceph-tools -- bash
rbd ls --pool=replicapool
```

Reviewer 3: To map PVC to image in ceph:

```
$ kubectl get pv -o 'custom-columns=NAME:.spec.claimRef.name,PVNAME:.metadata.name,STORAGECLASS:.spec.storageClassName,VOLUMEHANDLE:.spec.csi.volumeHandle'
```
AND using PVC name you want image name for:

```
$ CSIVOL=$(kubectl get pv $(kubectl get pv | grep <pvc_name> | awk '{ print $1 }') -o jsonpath='{.spec.csi.volumeHandle}' | cut -d '-' -f 6- | awk '{print "csi-vol-"$1}')
$ echo $CSIVOL

Author: @Madhu-1 @travisn  do we want to add these commands too?

```
```console
rbd ls --pool=replicapool
```
>```
> csi-vol-1a1bbb34-7461-11eb-a32b-0a580a81020c
>```

```console
rbd status csi-vol-1a1bbb34-7461-11eb-a32b-0a580a81020c --pool=replicapool
```
>```
> Watchers:
>	watcher=10.130.2.1:0/2076971174 client.14206 cookie=18446462598732840961
>```

```console
$ ceph osd blacklist add 10.130.2.1:0/207697117 # to know which watcher to block see above output
blacklisting 10.130.2.1:0/2076971174 until 2021-02-21T18:12:53.115328+0000 (3600 sec)
```

> After running the above command within a few minutes the pod will be running. **But don't forget to remove the above blacklist watcher**

Reviewer: If the blacklist is removed, this could cause corruption if that node comes back at a later time and the volume reconnects. So we should be very clear that the blacklisting can only be removed if the node is guaranteed to be gone.

Reviewer 2: Two scenarios here.

* when Node is completely dead

once the backlist is removed, bring back the original node and see we are able to get the pod running on the lost node.

* When only control-plane is lost but data-plane is still active

once the backlist is removed, start the kubelet on the node and see pod is running and we are able to access the data.

Reviewer: Those two scenarios are about getting the original node running again? Doesn't the admin need to go through those steps to recover a node before they try to force delete the pod and get it running somewhere else? If the blacklist is removed, it is removing the check that prevents corruption so I thought the admin could only do that if they're guaranteeing the node is permanently dead, at least at the data-plane.

Reviewer 2: > Those two scenarios are about getting the original node running again? Doesn't the admin need to go through those steps to recover a node before they try to force delete the pod and get it running somewhere else?

Blacklisting helps to recover the application pod, If the pod is still active on the node where control-plane is lost we can fence it off so no read/write happens.

 If the blacklist is removed, it is removing the check that prevents corruption so I thought the admin could only do that if they're guaranteeing the node is permanently dead, at least at the data-plane.

Yes, we need to test it out and confirm if the node comes back how it's going to behave.

```console
$ ceph osd blacklist rm 10.130.2.1:0/2076971174
un-blacklisting 10.130.2.1:0/2076971174
```

To verify

```console
kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod
```
>```
> csi-rbd-demo-depl-69cd495f9b-cqbcd           0/1     Running   0          3m8s
>```

> And,

Reviewer: No need for this section. When the pod is running, they don't need to see the details.
